Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, we may be heading into another wave of inflation.
This week several steel companies led by Armco, the nation's seventh largest producer,
announced price increases in steel averaging $4 a ton.
In justifications for their action, the steel companies take the position that a price
increases needed in order to offset the increase in cost rising from wage increases granted
under the third year of the contract with the United States steel workers of America.
Follardaire such a need is highly questionable to me, based on our experiences in the
Nanny Monopoly subcommittee of which I am chairman, which had a painstaking and thorough
investigation of steel.
Over the long run, most of the increases are offset by the increase in labor productivity,
but the best evidence of the need or lack of need of the steel companies for a price increase
can be gained by examining their profit figures.
The big question is whether the United States steel corporation, the nation's largest producer,
is they're going to raise its prices.
If it raises its prices following the lead of the smaller producers, then this price increase
will stick if it doesn't, the others will quickly get back into land.
For the first half of this year, United States steel profit rate after taxes on stockholders'
investment was 9% on an annual basis.
This is about the same level as it enjoyed in such good years as 1924, 528, 49, and 54.
And it has managed to do this while operating at only a little more than half capacity.
Whether these figures indicate a need for a price increase is highly dubious.
Above and beyond the effect of this increase on steel and direct steel buyers, however,
will be as effect upon the economy as a whole.
For nearly a year now, the nation has been experiencing a recession.
In recent weeks, there have been some indications that we are pulling out of it.
But take it from me.
If there is another wave of inflation, the buyers will let their purse strings again, and
the nation will plunge back into a worse recession.
For weeks, I have been urging the President to bring the leaders of steel in the steel industry
and of the steel union together to work out some wage price formula that would prevent this.
I personally wide-rod your blower the head of the U.S. steel and Dave McDonald the head
of the union asking if they would attend such a meeting.
Mr. McDonald said he would and Mr. Blower said he didn't say he wouldn't.
This is the time for statesmanship on the part of both labor and industry, and is the
time for statesmanship on the part of the President of the United States.
He can and he should exert the leadership which is office demands of its occupant when
the good of the nation is involved.
Let me say also that I think labor probably would and ought to be willing to make some
concession, some deferment of perhaps some benefits in order to hold a price, wage
land, and to prevent inflation.
Now let's turn to other subjects.
Congress is rushing a very hard toward adjournment.
Committees have been working early and late.
There have been long and arduous floor sessions, but Brazels are being achieved.
I'm happy that the appropriation bill containing the planning and site money for the new federal
building at Memphis was agreed to after a conference between the House and the Senate.
The city will be able to go ahead with its plans for this beautiful new building and the
new Civic Center now.
This week the House of Representatives reported the TVA's self-financing bill, that is the
committee did, in the same manner that the Senate passed it last year.
A spirited tour fight is anticipated on this bill in the House.
Nevertheless we simply must have this legislation this year for the benefit of the TVA.
Both the Senate and the House Judiciary Committees are again working on the omnibus
Judship Bill, which authorizes three new federal judges for Tennessee.
This bill also is vitally important and I'm certainly doing all I can to help it alone.
A highly important measure, the Tennessee River Basin Water Pollution Control Compact,
passed the Senate.
This bill had previously passed the House.
There are differences in the two versions which are now being worked out.
But it seems certain that this bill will now become law and Tennessee and its six neighboring
states can go ahead with the job of cleaning up the waters of the river, which is needed
to be done for a long, long time.
Thank you and goodbye until next week.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, the United States this weekend is in the midst
of a most dangerous situation since Korea.
As you know, the United States Marines today are in the little nation of Lebanon, ordered
there by President Eisenhower following a rebellion in Iraq, which is here and rioting
tensions in Lebanon itself.
The United States' six fleet is operating in the Mediterranean waters under battle conditions.
Army troops have been flowing into the Middle East from Europe.
United States forces are on a worldwide alert.
Personally, I have grave misgivings about the wisdom of the original decision to send in
United States troops.
On the day that the President made this decision, I was asked for comment, and this is what
I said.
I would have wished that the President could have waited for a meeting of the Security Council
and for consultation with our allies before sending the Marines to Lebanon.
I think there would have been less chance of uniting the Arab world against us had we
allowed the Security Council to act first.
I have grave misgivings about the wisdom of what was done.
However, the presence of Marines in Lebanon is now a fact, and therefore the nation is
committed, and little can be accomplished by debating the wisdom of this action.
And that's what I said on the day this was done.
The events of the week have shown that we did indeed arouse the hour of the Muslim world.
Russia is now playing the role of protector of Arab nationalism, a role which is totally
insincere, for international communism, the enemy of nationalism everywhere to play,
but one which has popularity among newly emerging nationalists of the Middle East.
On the other hand, the support of the British and the French has been forthcoming, and I
should add that everything that was done was completely legal under international law.
Our aid was requested by a member nation of the Baghdad Pact.
This weekend should be one of prayer that the great crises will pass without enlarging
into a conflict of migration which will sweep the whole Middle East and lead the war.
We can only pray and hope and remain courageous in the face of grave, grave danger.
On the other side of the Mediterranean and Europe, I attended a very successful meeting last
weekend.
As I told you on this program last week, the executive committee of the NATO Parliament
arians conference held a meeting in Paris with very distinguished private citizens from
all of the NATO countries to make plans for the Congress next year, which results from
a resolution that I sponsored at the last November session of the parliamentarians.
We decided that the Congress would be held in London in June of next year, the 10th anniversary
of NATO.
The British government has issued the invitation and will be the official host.
Meanwhile in each nation, we will make plans for securing delegations from among the private
citizens themselves to attend this conference and to give their governments the benefit of
their ideas and advice.
We want to make this an occasion for talking and thinking about NATO throughout the 15 NATO
nations.
After a passing event, I am more convinced than ever that citizens in a democracy such
as ours and such as prevails among the great majority of the NATO nations ought to have
some form in which they can get together and in which they can bring their ideas to play
on the great overriding problems of our time.
The diplomats and those of us in government have no monopoly on ideas in this field.
This Congress will make that very thing possible.
Finally, I want to report to you that the Senate this week took up the matter of the extension
of the reciprocal trade program.
I supported the five-year extension.
I have long thought that we would do much better in international trade if the world traders
knew that our policies would be stable for a longer period of time and has been possible
under the short extensions.
This is particularly important in view of the present conditions and the rapid development
of the European common market, which will be negotiating with the world on long-range
programs and which will supply considerable competition to the United States in world
markets.
I believe that experience under the five-year extension would prove most beneficial to
us as a nation.
Thank you and goodbye until next week.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, the Senate this week considered one of the
most important single pieces of legislation to come before Congress, and so far as it
affects Tennessee, it was the foreign bill.
No one will pretend that the bill we considered is designed to solve all the problems of agriculture.
The bill dealt with only three commodities, cotton, rice and corn, but it was very vital
to the cotton farmers.
If this bill is not finally enacted into law, Tennessee will have a reduction of more
than 20% in cotton acreage.
This would mean that a lot of farmers, particularly the smaller ones, would have to go out of business.
It would mean a further loss of business for the smaller cities and towns, which have
suffered enough as a result of the loss of business due to the soil bank and to the unusual
amount of water particularly in West Tennessee.
If the bill is finally enacted into law, Tennessee will receive an allotment of 600,000 acres.
Furthermore, the bill prevents the cutting of acreage to the small cotton farmer to a
point where he cannot survive.
It reduces, says that he cannot reduce him to more than 10 acres.
And it permits the planting of additional acres if the farm owner voluntarily accepts
a cut in price support.
This lighter provision will make cotton competitive in world markets.
While other phases of agriculture needed legislation, I supported this bill without amendments,
because I think these other phases should be taken care of in separate pieces of legislation.
We must be practical in an emergency situation such as this.
We have to pass a bill that will eventually be signed by the president.
We have passed one bill this year that was vetoed by him.
I believe this one will be signed if the house passes it, and while I'm certainly not
completely satisfied with this bill, I would rather have it than nothing.
Well I wanted to talk with you about another subject this week.
As our thoughts and prayers continue to be turned toward the hope of a restoration of
real peace in the Middle East, the Senate this week took a long step forward toward the
establishment of a body that might bring order into the world.
We passed a concurrent resolution urging the establishment of a permanent United Nations
security force.
There's a little background on this resolution with being ordered.
On August 8th last year, the Senate agreed to Senate Resolution 15, which had been introduced
to preceding January by several senators, including myself, under the principal sponsorship
of Senator Sparkman of our neighboring state of Alabama.
This resolution welcomed the establishment of a United Nations emergency force as a result
of the Suez Canal crisis.
We'd like to ask to express the sense of the Senate that first the force of a similar
character should be made a permanent arm of the United Nations.
Second it should be made up of units furnished by members of the UN other than permanent
members of the Security Council.
And third consideration should be given for assignments to volunteers other than nationals
of permanent members of the Security Council to serve with this force.
And for the expenses of the force would be met like all other regular expenses of the
United Nations.
Well, what were the results of this resolution?
Like so many other worthwhile things that wasn't followed through, the attitude of the
United States delegation to the UN was that it was a good idea, but that it would cost
too much.
Now, friends, this is another case of short-sighted economy.
Today, we're supporting the Marines in Lebanon, backed up by the six fleet lying off shore.
The cost of that operation I suspect will be far or far more in dollars than would be
our contribution for many, many years to the Security Force.
The cost and goodwill in the Middle East, the political repercussions of the step we have
had to take with the Marines, cannot be calculated.
In this troubled area, the presence of an international Security Force would be one thing, whereas
the presence of the armed nationals of a Western nation is quite another.
This week, the Senate repeated its resolution of last year with one difference.
The resolution was passed, that we passed, as the same as the one that I have described,
which we passed last year.
But this time, it is a concurrent resolution, which means that the House also will have
an opportunity to join with us.
Now, I believe that the House also will adopt this resolution, or it has nonpartisan support.
Of course, the establishment of such a force will not solve all of our problems.
Russia still will have the right of veto, but it is a long step in the right direction.
Thank you and goodbye until next week.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, we have some bad news this week.
We may be heading into another wave of inflation.
This week, several steel companies led by Armco, the nation's seventh largest producer,
and then later United States Steel announced price increases, averaging $4.50 a ton of steel.
I am very disappointed that this action has taken place.
In justification for their action, the steel companies take the position that a price
increases needed in order to offset the increase in cost rising from wage increases granted
under the third year of the steel companies contract with the United Steel Workers of America.
Whether there is such a need is highly questionable to me, based on our experiences in the Anime
Monopoly Committee of which I am chairman, which had a painstaking and thorough investigation
of steel.
Over the long run, most of the wage increases are offset by the increase in productivity,
but the best evidence of the need or lack of need of the steel companies for a price increase
can be gained by examining their profit figures.
Of course, if this increases sustain as it may very well be, it means that the price of
automobile, tractors, hand goods, everything that has steel in it even hairpins that women
use will go up and the cost of living index also will go up.
But let's talk about the profits and whether the steel price increase was justified.
For the first half of this year, the United States Steel Company's profits after taxes
on stockholders' investment was 9% on an annual basis.
This is about the same level as it enjoyed in such so-called good years as 1924, 25, 28,
49, and 54.
And it has managed to do this while operating at only a little more than half capacity.
Other of these figures indicate a need for a price increase is highly dubious to me.
Above and beyond the effect of this increase on steel and direct steel bars, however,
will be as effect upon the economy as a whole.
For an earlier year, the nation has been experiencing a recession.
In recent weeks, there have been some indications that we're pulling out of it, but it, but
take it from me.
If there's another wave of inflation, the bars will let their purse strings again, and
the nation will plunge back into a worse recession.
For weeks, I've been urging the President to bring the leaders of the steel industry
and of the steel union together to work out some price wage formula that would prevent
this increase, have each one of them grant some concessions, if necessary.
I personally wide-rod your blower the head of the U.S. steel, and Dave McDonald, the head
of the union, asking if they would attend such a meeting.
Mr. McDonald said that he would, and Mr. Blower didn't say that he wouldn't.
This, it seems to me, is a time for real statesmanship on the part of both labor and industry.
I think that labor in the general good ought to be able to defer some concessions in order
to have a whole-the-line, whole-the-priced-line formula, and to continue our recovery and to
increase the employment of people.
And you never know whether they would be willing to do until you get into a meeting, which
I asked the President to call.
And I think it's also a time for statesmanship on the part of the President.
He can, and he should exert the leadership which is office demands when the good of the
nation is involved.
And I hope that even now, even though several companies have announced the price increase
that he may call on them, and on the head of the union to work out some formula to call
off this price increase so that we will not be subjected to another runnest round of
inflation.
And now, friends, let's turn to other subjects, which are great interests.
Congress is rushing toward adjournment.
Committees have been working early and late.
There have been long and arduous floor sessions, but results are being achieved.
I'm happy that the appropriation bill containing the planning and site money for the new federal
building at Memphis was agreed to after a conference between the House and the Senate.
The city will be able to go ahead with its plans for this new building and the new civic
center now.
The House this week reported out the TVA self-financing bill in the same manner that
the Senate passed its last year.
A spirited forefight is anticipated when this bill gets to the House.
Nevertheless, we simply must have legislation for the TVA this year.
Both the Senate and the House Judiciary Committees are again working on the omnibus
Judship bill, which authorizes three new judges for Tennessee.
This bill also is vitally important, and I'm doing all I can to help it alone.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, where we certainly have had our ups and downs
in support of Tennessee Valley Authority as concern here in Congress this week.
This year, as you will remember, the Senate passed a good and workable self-financing
bill for the TVA.
We haven't had any appropriations for new major projects and new starts in the TVA since
the Eisenhower administration came to office in 1953.
The president himself, as a matter of fact, recommended that in lieu of appropriations,
the TVA be given the right to finance itself and so far as power operations are concerned.
The House began renewed consideration of the bill a week before last.
Private Parallel was out in force and conducted a vigorous campaign against it.
Then this week, the House Rules Committee met and voted to deny the TVA rule for consideration
of the bill.
That meant that unless the Rules Committee reconsidered and I'm very happy to say they did reconsider,
it would take a two-thirds vote to even bring the bill up for debate.
I was heart sick over what took place, but I was glad that the Speaker of the House,
Mr. Rayburn, went before the Rules Committee and helped the TVA.
This doesn't mean that the bill is by the House yet, but we're not going to give up the
fight until the last whistle is blown on this conference.
I certainly hope that the bill is passed.
We don't have a two-thirds vote in the House, but I do hope that we have majority.
We only had two votes to start with in the Rules Committee, but I'm glad to say that
many of our friends reconsidered.
The tactics of the private Parallel lobby should be clear for all to see and let's take
in place in connection with the TVA this week.
For years, they complained about the TVA getting appropriations from Congress.
And now it's clear that they really weren't worried about those appropriations at all,
which the TVA has repaid on schedule with a handsome return.
For now, they are clearly on the record as wanting to denounce even the right to finance
ourselves.
They are willing to jeopardize the investment that the government already has in the TVA
in the future of an entire region just to get their own selfish way.
What they want to do is simply to kill the TVA.
It's as simple as that.
And then with the example of TVA gone, they want to run away with their own prices.
They want again, they unfettered right to gouge the consumer.
The greed of the private Parallel lobby has brought it to grief before.
And I predict that with this example, reminiscing as it is of the old ensue days, the private
Parallel lobby is headed for grief again.
It just doesn't know the meaning of the philosophy of live and let live.
The House Committee dealt a serious and perhaps mortal blow to two other good and worthwhile
pieces of legislation this week.
One of these was the foreign bill, and I hope that they will reconsider that also.
The House tried desperately to overrule its rules committee on this very necessary foreign
bill.
And while there was a clear majority vote in favor of such action, the bill failed to get
the necessary two-thirds vote.
As you know, I supported and worked for this bill in the Senate, and it was passed in the
Senate.
The House Agricultural Committee reported it out in substantially the same form by unanimous
vote.
The rules committee decided to use its veto.
This is very, very serious in that it means that unless the bill is proud out of the House,
there will be a large cut in cotton acreage.
It also means that the small farmer will get a further cut, and some of them can hardly
survive as it is.
And it delays the day when cotton will become competitive on the world market.
Finally, there's the community facilities bill.
I sponsored this along with Senator Fulbright in the Senate.
This bill would have made it possible for communities, cities and counties and school districts
to finance local public works programs at low interest rates and over a long period of
years.
It would have been a great help to our economy.
I can't remember anything which has so interested the local officials of Tennessee.
I have many, many letters from mayors, county judges, and others outlining much-needed work
that they would do under this program.
But again, the rules committee denied it a rule.
All I can say is that we will try again next year, and I hope we will be successful.
There are often disappointments in this legislative business.
You work awfully hard for something, and then you see it lost.
But the only thing to do is to keep on trying.
I often think of the late Senator George Norris.
He tried for years to establish the TBA only to fail repeatedly, and then he finally got
it passed.
And we'll stay with this, do the same thing this time.
That's all for now.
Thank you very much.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, well we have a lot of things to talk about
this week.
First, I'm glad that it compromised.
It apparently has been reached in the house, which will make it possible for a farm bill
to pass this year.
The compromise will grant larger acreages for corn, cotton, and extend the wool act.
There won't really be a satisfactory program, compromises seldom are.
Nevertheless it will make it possible for the cotton farmers and particular the small
ones to survive, which would not be true as far as many small cotton farmers are concerned
in the absence of any legislation at all.
Next the very important National Defense Education Bill, which had already passed the House
of Representatives was passed by the Senate in a meeting this week which ran on until after
midnight.
The program was proposed after the nation was shot last fall when it suddenly came to
foot to the full realization that the Soviet Union is outstripping the United States and
many fields of education.
The bill would set up a four year program of federal scholarships, scholarships, and student
loans, but preference given to students of science, mathematics, and foreign languages.
These would be provided to state education agencies for improvements of science facilities
in elementary and secondary schools and for a guidance in counseling program.
Under the bill, institutes would be established to train teachers in subjects deemed necessary
for the National Defense.
There would be support for vocational training and financial help for research and new educational
techniques.
Finally the bill sets up a National Advisory Council on Science and Education.
I supported the bill strongly.
I was one of its co-sponsors and I posed the amendment which cut the scholarship grants
from $1,000 a year to $250 a year.
President Eisenhower incidentally had supported the $1,000 figure.
I think it was very short-sighted for the Senate to make this reduction.
I hope that it will not result in too many talented and deserving young people who could
make a real contribution to this country, being denied an adequate education and they feel
so vital to our national defense that I'm afraid it might.
Education doesn't come at bargain basement rates.
I didn't want to mention something which did not occur on the floors of Congress, but which
is of overriding importance to all of us.
That is the action which began this week and the United Nations General Assembly which
President Eisenhower personally addressed and I'm proud of the address that he made.
In his address the President outlined a program which the United States was willing to back
in an effort to restore peace to the Middle East.
The President proposed a United Nations peace force that could move swiftly to save Middle
East governments threatened by armed pressure and infiltration coming across the borders.
This is far superior to the practice of sending United States Marines.
It is consistent with an action which I supported here in the Senate and which I talked about
on this program last week, namely the setting up of a permanent UN Security Force.
The President proposed also a regional development institution which could get outside help,
which would be governed by the Arab states themselves and whose aim would be to raise
the standard of living in the Middle East.
The institution would try to develop water resources to make the desert bloom, help the
countries to fight disease and otherwise promote progress.
Balees ideas aren't new.
Many have urged them for years including a team from the Tennessee Valley Authority which
studied the Jordan River almost a decade ago.
It is most encouraging to have the President present to them, present them to the United
Nations and seek to lift the minds of the nations from their petty quarrels to the great
possibilities cooperation would bring.
If the President will only follow through and I certainly hope that he will and seek to
implement these ideas, then we could someday see a stable and prosperous Middle East which
is not a constant threat to world peace.
Well the Congress this week is nearing adjournment.
I think that by the end of next Saturday we may be through but it is anybody's guess.
We have a great minute pieces of legislation and we have all been very busy trying to
go a lot of bills and things through the Congress during these dying days.
Thank you and that's all until next week.
Ladies and gentlemen I distinguish in a very fine gentleman who is very much in the news
these days is Admiral Rickover and I know that all of you are very happy to see Admiral Rick
over again.
Thank you.
Admiral Rickover as all of you know was the head of the team and the man who sparked the
effort and who is responsible for the development of the submarine notalus in which a Tennessee
boy Commander Anderson from Waverley Tennessee took this notalus of which this is a model
under the ice cap under the North Pole in a most remarkable journey historic journey
10 days ago.
Admiral Rickover I believe that you trained Commander Anderson didn't you?
Yes sir Commander Anderson worked in my office for about a year preparatory to going
on the models.
Well how did this submarine get under the ice cap of the North Pole?
Did you think it ever wouldn't make it?
Yes sir we had planned for this trip Commander Anderson and I for quite some time and he
actually steamed about 1900 miles under the ice cap on an unstop trip.
1900 miles.
Well Admiral Rickover we might have proud of Commander Anderson down in Tennessee and
I know that you are proud of him.
We are all proud of him everyone in the Navy is proud and we are also proud of what the
event signifies for the future defense of our country.
Well what do you feel about that aspect of the matter?
It means that now the whole polar regions are open to us as an area of warfare.
It means that we can have missile carrying submarines hiding out under the ice and if
anyone dares to attack us even if they destroy the United States they inevitably will be
destroyed themselves.
Well thank you very much Admiral Rickover and you are proud of Commander Anderson we are
and we are mighty mighty proud of you.
Very much thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
I hope you've always given our programs.
Thank you Admiral Rickover.
Ladies and gentlemen friends of Tennessee as this telecast is being prepared the second
session of the 85th Congress is in its last moments.
This has been an interesting session of Congress in many many ways.
Perhaps looking back which from the vantage point of time we may sometime call it a historic
one.
This Congress was the first to be faced with the challenges of the space age heralded by
the satellites now circling the earth.
The session began with a searching for the significance of this venture into space and
with a realization that what had been regarded as adequate here to for could no longer be
so regarded.
We have passed considerable major legislation which I feel was vitally necessary to guarantee
our security and to enable us to prepare adequately for our ever increasing responsibilities
in this new age.
For example I strongly supported the Defense reorganization plan.
I also strongly supported the establishment of a new agency designed to deal specifically
with the development of a comprehensive program of research and operations and aeronautical
and space sciences.
This newly created agency is the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to be civilian
controlled and to deal with the problems of space flight and the development of aircraft,
missiles and other space vehicles.
It is indeed a dramatic and interesting step into the future.
I also supported the National Defense Education Bill providing for federal scholarships to aid
talented students and assisting the states to improve science, mathematics and language
teaching.
Congress further responded to the critical military problems by appropriating a record
amount during peacetime for the defense of our nation.
In the field of foreign affairs we passed two extremely important builds to which I gave
my support.
The troubles in Latin America and the crises in the Middle East underlang the vital need
for full authorization of the mutual security problem.
The military and economic support provided under this act is that one part of our attempt
to meet the challenge of Russia's determination to wage wars of economic aggression combined
with political subversion.
This challenge also pointed out the need for an extension of the reciprocal trade program
originated by Cordell Ho.
This program has been extended for a period of four years which will give the nation's
traders an opportunity to negotiate long, long-arranged contracts in the head before.
This will give free enterprise a free-or-hand in meeting the challenge of Russia's controlled
economy in the world's markets.
Under domestic side I supported several measures designed to stimulate business, restore consumer
confidence and stimulate the economy.
I regret that the Community Facilities Act which would have made it possible for local
communities to undertake long deferred and greatly needed public improvements failed to pass
in the house.
However, other proposals met with more success, including a major housing bill to put new
life into the construction industry.
During the session I spent much time as you know as chairman of the Antimanopoli Committee
trying to beat the inflation which is threatening us.
Also we pass legislation requiring managers of employee welfare funds to register those
funds with a Department of Labor and thereby make their activities public.
Unfortunately, the more comprehensive labor bill failed to pass in the house.
There were many activities in this Congress of particular interest at Tennessee.
The new water pollution control compact was passed.
We secured appropriations for new flood control and harbor works, including the long delayed
work on the West Tennessee tributaries.
A bill in which we were all greatly interested, the TBA self-financing bill, which passed
the Senate last year failed to come to a vote in the house.
Here's a measure which we should start on very early in the next year and see that it
is passed.
This has been a very sketchy summary and many things of important of not importance have
not been mentioned.
But before closing I wanted to take this opportunity to thank this station for carrying
my reports during this year as a public service.
And I wanted to thank you for the interest that you have taken, for the letters and suggestions
that I have received.
And so now until the next session of Congress, goodbye.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, this will be my last broadcast of the first
session of the 85th Congress.
I want to say that I have enjoyed very much having these weekly business with you.
And I want to express my very deep appreciation for the cooperation of this station and making
them possible.
As soon as Congress adjourns, I am scheduled to leave for Europe, where I am looking forward
eagerly to rejoining Nancy and the children.
They have been vacationing at Nancy's former home in Scotland.
It will be a brief vacation for the Senate has named me as a delegate to the Interparlimentary
Union meeting, scheduled to convene in London September 12.
There I will have the opportunity of meeting with members of Parliament and Congresses
of other countries.
And we will discuss some of the common problems that our nation's face.
And following that on September 23 and 24, I will attend the Western World Conference
in Paris.
This conference will be composed of representatives of the NATO countries.
They will not all be government officials, but will include journalists and other leading
citizens.
To discuss some of the ways many of the problems that the set the free world can be settled
on a citizen to citizen basis.
I consider such meetings as these of very great importance.
I believe that it is in the face to face exchanges of opinions and views that we secure
the kind of knowledge and understanding that others must follow in order to get, and we
all must follow in order to knock off the rough edges of international relations.
We, Tennessee, have known that for a long time.
It is one of the doctrines that Cardell Ho always preached and followed.
And after these meetings, I will return to Washington for a resumption of the steel here
in.
Our anti-monopoly subcommittee had to interrupt these hearings due to the rest of the final
days before the adjournment of the country.
We have finished with the United States steel company, the price leader in their steel, who
raised their prices six dollars a ton.
We will resume with Bethlehem steel.
Among other things we want to know about practically all the other companies, felt they should
raise their prices exactly six dollars a ton.
During recesses and interruptions of these hearings, I hope to get in a lot of visits to
Tennessee.
In other words, I hope to be seeing you in person.
Well the adjournment of the session of Congress is always a time for looking over the record
of what has been done and what has been left undone.
Congress will be doing that for many weeks to come.
Personally, I dislike the numbers method of assessing the Congress.
This Congress passed so many laws and this one passed so many more and therefore the one
that passed the most must have been the best.
I have been a member of Congress and the House and the Senate for more than 19 years now.
And I have been a member of those that passed many laws and those that passed not so many.
And I can tell you that sometimes the Congress rises to its greatest heights when it doesn't
pass the law.
There are many proposals, fiercely lobbied for by special interest groups, which should
not become law and Congress should be congratulated for standing up against them.
Some such examples in this session were the proposal to return the alien property, a pure
special interest piece of legislation, a brick or amendment which seems to be constantly
recurring in a new form but still with a purpose of stripping the President of his right
to act and foreign affairs.
The natural gas bill, the pre-matchel gas from regulation and incidentally to raise the
price of gas and many many others.
On the other hand, some very good far reaching legislation did pass this conference, such as
the Niagara River Power Project, the Adams for Peace Program, the TVA Self-Financing Program
which passed the Senate, but still has to go through the House of Representatives.
The flood control bill, under which we will able to include the Memphis Farber and many
projects on the Cumberland River and other places in Tennessee.
I think it is well that some settlement of the civil rights issue seems to have been achieved.
Of course, I'm not satisfied by any means.
If I could have had my brothers, as the little boy says, I'd like to include a stool building
aid program, more housing assistance and many many other things.
But neither am I wholly disappointed.
And now goodbye from this program until next year.
I want to thank you for your interest in this program for your letters and once again
to this station for carrying this program as public service.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee.
This week the Senate lost upon what may prove to be an historic debate and the traditional
and classic sense of that word.
The debate revolved around the so-called Eisenhower Civil Rights Bill.
On Monday, Senator William Nolan of California, the minority leaders, moved that the Senate
take up the bill which was then reposing on the calendar.
His motion touched off to debate.
Up to the moment of this filming of this broadcast, and I feel certain up to the moment of
your viewing it, we still will be technically debating the motion to take up the bill.
Theoretically, debate on the bill will follow after that time.
The debate was launched on a high level by both sides, marked only by one off-key comment.
There's an Eisenhower who bears responsible responsibility for the bill, because it was
in his name that it must present it.
Showed his disposition to sit down and reason when he admitted that he didn't understand
it all and that there was some vague language that he wanted to consider.
While he met with Senator Richard Russell of Georgia, the bill's leading critic, Senator
Russell for his part showed a similar disposition to reason when he declined to force the vote
on his point of order against the bill.
Namely, that technical corrections and the printing rendered it a bill so erroneous that
consideration would have to start all over a new.
They weren't off-key comment to which I referred.
They won an only comment of the week which showed a lack of understanding.
A patent political attitude for this historic debate was uttered by the vice president of
the United States, Richard Nixon.
He chose this moment to save flatly and unequivocally, that the bill would be passed with no
amendments whatsoever.
In his utterance, there was no room for compromise, for correction, for improvement.
For my own part, I entered into this debate and the spirit typified by the words of Senator
Lyndon Johnson of Texas, the majority leader.
Senator Johnson said, the immediate objective is to ensure fairness and thoroughness.
As long as we are fair and thorough, I believe that ultimately we shall arrive at constructive
achievements.
I too believe that.
I think that the stated purpose of this bill, a guarantee of the right to vote is a good
one.
All citizens of the United States, every one of them, no matter what his color, what his
religion, what his origin, if he meets the requirements as to age, education and residence,
should be guaranteed that right.
In seeking the guarantee one right, we should not sacrifice another.
And therefore our favor and will support an amendment, the guarantee that a jury's tile
will be a court of those who may be cited for contempt, on charges of violating the right
to resist bill, of course, namely the right to vote.
My time is almost up, but imposing, let me say that although some may not agree with
the purposes of this bill, let us not forget that we are living in an age of vast and great
change.
The course of history cannot be saved.
The world in this age of mobility and justice has struck engraved.
Our neighbors in the world look to us, the practice to democracy that we preach.
And that democracy revolves around the ballot, the right to vote.
If the bill is simply a guarantee of the right to vote and it is brought down to that
basis, then I think that the vast majority of Americans, both North and South and East
and West, will be far and will support it.
To debate our field, if it continues on this tile level, will be both enlightening and
helpful and educational to the people of the United States.
I will continue to report to you on the progress of this debate from time to time because I
think it's going to be going on for a long time.
Let me say that it was when the extreme regrets that we were, I felt that we were unable to
get up to the TBA self-financing bill before this debate started.
I hope that this bill, which has now been reported out of the public works committee, which
will enable the TBA to issue bonds to continue to build steam plants to serve our people.
This bill may be brought up sometime this session after this debate is over.
And the same is true of the bill, which is now in the Jewish air committee, which many
people can see came up to testify about this week.
That's all for now.
Thank you.
I'll see you guys next week.